---
layout: post
title: The History of Acidity
---
>It is scandalous that school chemistry tends to render the lesson on acidity so dull, giving no indication of how fascinating and puzzling the concept of acidity is. Hasok Chang

## Antiquity

The term acid comes from Greece through Rome. Both ‘acid’ and ‘acetic’ come the Latin ‘acere’ meaning ‘sour-tasting’. Alkalis were less well understood, although it was well known they could be created by mixing ash with water. By mixing animal fat, ash and water the Greeks were able to produce soap. The word ‘alkali’ came from the Arabic word for ‘roasting’. The term ‘base’ came about later and its history is less clear.  

## Tyrian Purple & Orchil Dyes

I will not take a brief tangent from chemistry and talk about dyes, however you will see this to be important and interesting.

Tryian Purple is a very exclusive natural dye with a reddish-purple colour. It is from the city of Tyre, Lebanon form where it gets its name. The dye is made from a complex process which uses the mucus excreted from several species of Murex sea-snails.

The Discovery of Purple by Hercules’s Dog
by Theodoor van Thulden in 1636

The popular legend tells that the discovery of Trian Purple dye was by Hercules of Tyre (specifically his dog) whilst his dog was eating Murex snails on the beach. These stained his mouth purple. The Is shown in the painting “The Discovery of Purple by Hercules’s Dog” by Theodoor van Thulden in 1636.

The recipe for Tyrian Purple dye was a closely guarded secret to ensure a monopoly of the trade and ensure high prices. Therefore, a detailed history is hard to account. Most of Tyre’s wealth came from the Tyrian Purple dye trade. One of the reasons it was so highly priced was its ability to be non-fading over time, weather and sunlight also made the colour stronger over time which further added to its value. Production began about 1200 BC and continued until the fall of Constantinople.

Murex pecten

Because of the high cost of production only those with great weather were able to wear purple clothing. During the fourth century AD, laws were tightened until only the roman emperor could were Tyrian Purple. Hence, it’s association with status, wealth and power.

8,000 Murex for one gram of dye.

Due to the high expensive nature of Tyrian Purple dye, and the stats associated with it. Various attempts to create alternatives were sought.

Lichen consists of fungi and algae living symbiotically.  

Arnaldus de Villanova - Orchil used as ‘poor man’s purple’ - shorter lived

Litmus comes from of the Old Norse word for ‘dye’ or ‘colour’.  

## Enlightenment Thoughts

Lavoisier, in 1776, proposed that all acids contained the substance oxygen. Both nitric acid (aqua fortis) and sulphuric acid (oil of vitriol) - HNO3 & H2SO4 - contain oxygen; although HCl (muriatic acid) does not. The British chemist, Davy, during his study of gases tested this theory and found it to be wrong.

Priestley in 1774 successfully collected isolated oxygen, then called dephlogisticated air, however as the phlogiston theory was proved incorrect, it required a new name. Lavoisier coined the term ‘oxygen’ which came from Greek roots, ‘oxys’ from Greek ὀξύς meaning sharp (acidic) and ‘genes’ from ‘γενής’ meaning something that produces. Hence oxygen literally means something that produces sharpness (acid). Despite the scientific alteration, the name stayed.

Liebig proposed that it was hydrogen that was responsible for the acidity of certain substances. Although this theory also had issues, NH3 for instance is basic but contains hydrogen.

Arrhenius proposes that it wasn’t hydrogen that caused acid behaviour but hydrogen ions – H+ whereas bases were from the OH- ion. Independently Johannes Nicolaus Brønsted and Thomas Martin Lowry, in 1923, generalised this theory such that acids were H+ donors whilst bases were H+ acceptors.

Electron donation

AlCl3 which can accept a pair of electrons (Lewis acid) from a Cl- ion forming AlCl4-.  

Through studies of the history of science we  
