---
layout: post
title: How Would I Change Imperial
---
If I was running Imperial these are some of the things I would think about changing. My gaol would be **to make Imperial the world's best university**. I want to describe changes to both the uni as a whole and my course.

## Changes to the Uni

I would aim to have abut 12,000 undergraduates and 12,000 postgraduates.

### Term Lengths

I would change the term lengths. I would have 3 terms of 12 weeks long: winter, spring and summer. Christmas and Easter would have 3 weeks holidays and summer would be 10 weeks. These would give some longest terms of any university.

I would not have reading weeks, for any courses.

I would have exams at the end of terms and not after the holidays. This would allow holidays to be kept for time off.

### Courses

I would get rid of a bunch of undergrad courses, with the aim that each department should only provide one undergraduate course.

The only courses available would only be 4-year integrated masters (MSci or Meng). For example the Physics department would only offer MSci Physics, Maths would only offer MSci Mathematics.

There would be a few degrees taught by two departments: Joint Mathematics and Computing and Biochemistry.

I would get rid of all MRes courses. This is based on the philosophy that researchers should be paid for doing research.

Departments would only offer one Msc course, eg Physics would offer MSc Physics. The Msc course would be the exact same as the fourth year of the MSci course. Currently there are some modules on the MSc course not available to MSCI students. I would make these available to MSci students.

In short, each department would offer one Msci, one MSc and PhDs (by nature extremely varied). The focus should be on reduced the bureaucracy of departments.

### Comprehensives

I would have all departments have comprehensive exams, sat after Easter of year 3. It would assess all content in first and second year as well as ~50% of content from 3rd year.

These exams would be the most difficult exams of any UK university. They should count for ~50% of your degree.

### Correctives

I would get rid of I-Explore/Horizons program. I would replace this with the 'correctives'.

These are two courses studied every week (Thursday and Friday from 1600-1800) by all students in all years (including MSc). This timeframe is to allow sports teams to practice on Mondays and Tuesdays and then play their matches on Wednesday afternoons.

There would be languages offered (as is done currently in Horizons). I would also add Latin and Ancient Greek to this.

What types of courses would be offered? It would be focused on

* **Languages:**
These are currently offered by the Horizons program. I would add Latin and Ancient Greek to this.
* **Sciences:**
These would be smaller courses taught be departments for students from other departments.
* **Tech Projects:**
* **Humanities:**
Students would need to write 2/3 essays per term. They would be on topic including *Paradise Lost*, *Shakespeare*, *Western Philosophy*, *History of the West*, etc.

For example the Japanese society could help run Japanese lessons.

### Campus

I would change the campus to be focused on two main hubs: South Kensington and White City. The issue with the White City campus is the A40 which cuts right through the campus - radical ideas are needed for this (ie sinking it beneath ground).

I would have student accommodation on campus. I would also attempt to have all 4 years of students staying in halls.

Finding ideal transport links between South Kensington and White City is important, especially for cycling. Currently there is no ideal pathway and both involve busy and polluting roads.

I would create student workshops. These would essentially be DT labs (contains 3D prints, laser cutters and other workshop equipment) to allow students to create whatever they wanted. I would also create students chemistry labs (for example is students wanted to create their own batteries) - students would probably need to do a safety course.

## Changes to my course

I would make add more content to the degree - the aim would be to make it the most rigorous physics degree in the UK.

I would replace the first/second/third system used in the UK with the American GPA system. Students would still be classified using the UK system but the GPA system would give more precise results for student ability.

I would make exams only count for 50% of the end of year grade. The other 50% would be course-work. This would involve weekly problem sheets (which would be difficult to very diffcult) which would be due on Mondays so students could do them over the weekend.

I would elimnate the seminrs in thier current form as I do not belive them to be pedagogically beneficial.

I would eliminte lectures. Students would have ~4/5 lectures a week. These would not be fore covering new content but for problem solving.

#### Year 1

- **Mathematics**
  - Calculus (Based on *Elementary Calculus by H. Jermone Keisler*)
  - Linear Algebra (Based on *Linear Algebra Done Right by Sheldon Axler*)
  - Complex Variables
  - Introductory Analysis
  - Statistics
- **Mechanics & Relativity**
  - Classical Mechanics
  - Special Relativity
- **Oscillations & Waves**
  - Oscillations & Waves
  - Circuit Theory
  - Fourier Analysis
- **Electricity & Magnetism**
  - Electricity
  - Magnetism
  - Optics
- **Year 1 Lab**
  - Lab Experiments
  - Programming
  - Group Project
- **Option Modules**
  - Advanced Electronics
  - Silicon Photonics

#### Year 2

- **Mathematics**
  - Geometric Algebra
  - Tensor Calculus (inc. differential forms)
  - Calculus of Variations
- **Quantum Mechanics**
- **Classical Mechanics**
  - Rigid Bodies
  - Lagrangian Mechanics
  - Hamiltonian Mechanics
- **Electromagnetism**
  - EM Fields in Matter
  - EM Waves
  - Optics
  - EM & Relativity
- **Thermal Physics**
  - Thermodynamics
  - Statistical Mechanics
- **Year 2 Lab**
  - Lab Experiments
  - Programming
- **Option Courses**
  - Abstract Algebra
  - History of Science
  - Teaching Physics

#### Year 3

- **Particle Physics**
- **Solid State Physics**
- **General Relativity 1**
- **Year 3 Lab**
  - Lab Experiments
  - Programming
- **Option Courses**
  - Foundations of Quantum Mechanics
  - Lasers & Optics
  - Plasma Physics
  - Astrophysics
  - Complexity Science
  - Computational Physics

### Year 4

- **Research Project**
- **Option Courses**
  - Quantum Field Theory
  - Quantum Theory of Matter
  - General Relativity 2
  - Nanotechnology
  - Quantum Optics
  - Particle Physics
  - Cosmology
  - Laser Technology
  - Unification
