---
layout: post
title: Spacecraft Propulsion
---
## Basic Astrodynamics

We start with an overview of basic concepts and the issues these pose for space exploration.

### The Rocket Equation

The (ideal) rocket equation is named after the Russian mathematician Konstantin Tsiolkovsky in 1903 who independently derived it in 1903. However the British mathematician William Moore derived it in 1810.

$$\Delta v = v_e\ln{\frac{m_i}{m_f}}$$

It gives us an expression for $\Delta v$. Every orbital manoeuvre has a specific value. For example to get from earth to LEO takes $9.7kms^{-1}$ of $\Delta v$. To get from LEO to Mars takes $4.3kms^{-1}$. [This](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Delta-v_budget) Wikipedia article contains the $\Delta v$ budgets for various space missions.

[This](http://sdg.aero.upm.es/index.php/online-apps/porkchop-plot) online tool by the Polytechnic University of Madrid can be used to create porkchop plots for specific dates and orbits.

To increase $\Delta v$ we can either increase the exit speed of the exhaust or we have to increase the

$$m_i = m_fe^{\frac{\Delta v}{v_e}}$$

This means for missions requiring larger $\Delta v$, such as space exploration we need an **exponentially increasing** wet mass. This is unfeasible for space exploration.

### Specific Impulse

Specific impulse $I_{sp}$ descries how efficiently a rocket engine creates thrust. A higher specific impulse engine would need less mass of fuel to get to the same $\Delta v$.

Specific impulse is given by

$$I_{sp}=\frac{v_e}{g}$$

where $g$ is the standard gravity $(g=9.81ms^{-2})$.

An electric propulsion system tends to have very high specific impulse. This is due to the high exhaust velocity.

### Thrust

In rocketry thrust is given by the equation

$$F=v_e \cdot \frac{dm}{dt} $$

where $\frac{dm}{dt}$ is the change in mass. Importantly, $v_e$ is measured relative to the rocket. To take off from earth the rockets thrust must be greater than it's weight.

Subtracting the drag vector from the thrust vector gives you excess thrust. This is very important when looking at aerodynamic efficiency. The Boeing 737MAX had a greater distance between the thrust axis and the drag axis, therefore Boeing installed the MCAS system - which failed and killed over 300 people during 2018/19.

## Chemical Based Propulsion

I don't intent to spend too long on chemical thrusters. I've included only the very basics.

There are four types of chemical propulsion: solid fuel, hybrid, liquid fuel and monopropellant.

## Electrical Propulsion

There are three types of electric propulsion: electrostatic, electrothermal and electromagnetic. In electrothermal and electromagnetic thrusters, both ions and electrons are accelerated simultaneously, no neutralizer is required.

### Electrostatic

The propellant is ionised and then accelerated via the electric field.

#### Hall Effect Thruster

### Electrothermal

Electricity is used to heat the propellant, the expansion of the hot gas through the nozzle gives the rocket kinetic energy.

#### Resistojet

#### Arcjet

### Electromagnetic

Both electric and magnetic force are used to impart the propellant.

#### Hall Effect Thruster

#### Magnetoplasmadynamic thruster

#### Pulsed plasma thruster

#### Negative ion thruster

## Power Sources

### Solar Panels

### Fuel Cells

### RTGs

### Nuclear Reactor

## Future Technologies

### Lattice Confinement Fusion

### Nuclear Thermal Propulsion

### Air Breathing Electric Propulsion

## Appendix A: Ionocraft
