---
layout: post
title: The Distribution of Elites
---
In every society a small number of people tend to have a large impact. There are often power laws at play.

It is often hard to predict exactly which people will have an impact and it would be wrong to assume they operate in a vacuum, they will have people who support them and work with them.

However, we can often find similar personality traits in these people. Interviews are often used to screen for these people, elite universities try to get them as students.

This are some thoughts on government and elites.

**Elite Universities**

There has been much recent controversy about the Harvard selection process. Mainly that the primary selector is not intelligence.

Elite universities are such because the children of the elites go there. Entrance requirements to stop anyone getting in and allows children of the non-elite entry too.

**Keju**

The Imperial Examinations were important exams used in Imperial China from the Song dynasty (~1000AD) to the Qing dynasty (~1900 AD).

Chinese dynasties were formed by military conquest. The leaders would require a number of intelligent and well-educated officials to carry out the bureaucratic functions and guide the ruler. These positions were given to people based on their performance in the Keyu. Any adult male could take the exam, however due to the costs of taking time to study, mainly the wealthy would apply.

The exam was introduced to centralise power amongst the emperor and away from the aristocracy.

>Most important, the promise of the examinations transformed learning from an elite concern to a preoccupation. Education became less the domain of scholarly families comprising one portion of elite society and more an activity urged upon academically promising boys and young men throughout elite society. John W. Chaffee

>the true characteristic of the Song political system was not autocracy but "scholar-official government," made possible by the existence of the examination system as a means of validating political authority. Over the long run, the emperor shifted from being a figure with administrative power to one with symbolic power, tightly constrained by the system he was part of, even if he did not always act according to the ideals his ministers urged upon him; the emperor was not the top of a pyramid but the keystone in an arch, whose successful functioning depended on his staying in his place. Peter K. Bol

>Boys entered [private primary] school at eight and [government prefectural] college at fifteen. Those whose talents could be developed were selected and gathered in the college, whereas the inferior ones were returned to the farm, for scholars and farmers did not exchange occupations. Having entered college, one would not work on the farm. Thus scholars and farmers were completely differentiated. As to support in college, there was no worry about sons of officials. But even sons of commoners, as soon as they entered college, were sure to be supported [by the state]. Cheng Yi (1033–1107)

Only ~5% of entrants passed the exam.

Abolished by the Qing dynasty as passing the exam was not related to being able to govern well.

The British civil service

**Useless Politicians**

**Anaesthetical Growth**

growth and calmness

**China vs America**
